.\" 
.\" Manual page for qmidiarp
.\" Process with:
.\"   groff -man -Tascii qmidiarp.1 | less
.\"
.\" Get a printable version with:
.\"   groff -t -e -mandoc -Tps qmidiarp.1 > qmidiarp.ps
.\"
.TH QMIDIARP 1 2009-10-20
.SH NAME
qmidiarp \- MIDI arpeggiator and LFO

.SH SYNOPSIS
.br
.B qmidiarp
[\fIOPTION\fR] [\fIfile\fR]
.br 
.B qmidiarp
{
.B \-\-help 
| 
.B \-\-version
}

.SH DESCRIPTION
QMidiArp
is an advanced MIDI arpeggiator, programmable step sequencer and LFO for 
the ALSA sequencer. It can 
hold any number of arpeggiator or LFO modules running in parallel. The 
arpeggiator modules produce sequences depending on the notes sent to
their input port, which is typically connected to a keyboard or another 
sequencer. The step sequencer modules allow to create simple linear, 
monophonic and globally transposable sequences similar to the first 
analog sequencers. The MIDI LFOs independently
produce MIDI controller data of adjustable waveform, time resolution,
amplitude and duration. For each module, an input note filter is 
available, and the output port and channel can be set independently. 
Since the modules use a common sequencer queue, they are automatically 
in sync with each other. QMidiArp works with an internal tick resolution
of 192 ticks per beat. The queue can be synchronized to an incoming MIDI 
realtime clock or as a JACK transport client. Most of the relevant
control elements are accessible via MIDI controller through a MIDI-learn
infrastructure.
QMidiArp
also has a log tool displaying the history of incoming MIDI events in 
colors depending on their type.
QMidiArp is based on the Qt4 toolkit.

.SS "General Operation"
A new arpeggiator or LFO module can be created by
clicking one of the 
.B Add Arp..., Add LFO...
or
.B Add Step Sequencer...
buttons, which will show a new
tab with the chosen module in the main area. The modules can be renamed
or removed using the corresponding buttons or menu functions. Modules
can be detached from the main window to control and view them in
parallel. They can be brought back to the main window again by clicking
on the icon on the left side of each module title bar. They can also be
aligned side-by-side within the same window if the main window is
stretched sufficiently before reinserting a module. The entire
setup containing all arps, sequences and LFOs in the tab bar along with 
the parameters set in the 
.B Settings 
window can be saved to or loaded from
a QMidiArp XML file (.qmax). The 
.B tempo 
of the queue can be set in beats per minute and
affects all modules. The queue is started and stopped by 
the blue arrow button. 

.SS "MIDI Clock operation"
QMidiArp can use incoming MIDI clock events as clock and start/stop 
control source.
If the 
.B MIDI clock button 
right of the tempo box is pressed, the running ALSA queue is stopped, 
and QMidiArp
will wait for an incoming "MIDI Clock Start" event from an external 
source connected to QMidiArp's MIDI input. Once this event is received,
the queue is started using MIDI realtime clock events as clock
source. QMidiArp will best remain in sync with the incoming 
MIDI clock if its internal tempo value (see above) approximately 
corresponds to that of the incoming clock. The MIDI clock tempo is,
however, measured while the queue is running. Therefore, if the tempos of 
the MIDI clock and that of QMidiArp differ, synchronization should 
become stable from the second queue start. The queue will stop when a 
MIDI Clock Stop event is received. During MIDI Clock operation, 
QMidiArp's own clock start and stop functions as well as adding or 
loading new setups are disabled. They are enabled again by 
unchecking the MIDI clock button. 

.SS "JACK Transport Client Operation"
When the 
.B Jack Transport Connect 
button is pressed, QMidiArp will try to connect to a running Jack server 
and then function
as a Jack Transport client, i.e. set its tempo and remain synchronized 
to a running Jack Transport master. Note that QMidiArp will restart
its queue from zero whenever Jack transport is starting regardless of 
Jack Transport's position. This also applies in case of a looping Jack
Transport queue. The Jack button will be released automatically
if QMidiArp gets disconnected from Jack by a possible Jack shutdown or
if Jack is not available at connection time. 
.PP
Note: MIDI Clock and Jack Transport button states will be saved with the 
QMidiArp session file, and get active or inactive when a new session
file is loaded. 

.SS "Arpeggiator Modules"
QMidiArp's arpeggiators can produce complex patterns derived from the
notes played on a MIDI keyboard. QMidiArp's arpeggiator modules 
were inspired by the MAP1 hardware arpeggiator by Rudi Linhard.
.PP
.B Input and Output panels
.PP
Each arpeggiator has an 
.B Input 
and an 
.B Output
panel. The Input panel 
defines the note range and the MIDI channel to which the arp is 
assigned. Notes that pass this Input
filter are sorted by pitch and added to the internal note buffer of the
arpeggiator. Incoming notes that do not match any filter can either be
discarded or forwarded to a selectable MIDI port (see 
.B Settings
). The 
.B Output 
panel holds settings for the 
.B MIDI channel 
and 
.B output port 
to which the arpeggiator notes will be sent. 
.PP
.B "Arpeggiator Patterns"
.PP
Arpeggio patterns can be selected and edited in the 
.B Pattern
panel. 
.B Pattern presets 
are selectable from a combo box. The currently
active pattern is displayed as a piano roll type screen showing the
base notes as streaks. The y-scale of the graphics 
window corresponds to the index of the notes in the pattern. Octave 
changes (see 
.B Editing patterns
) are shown as additional horizontal lines. 
The notes that are eventually sent depend on the input notes received 
by the arpeggiator. The received notes notes are attributed in ascending 
order to the notes defined in the pattern. For example, a single streak 
on the bottom of the arp display ("simple" presets) means that at
the first pass through the pattern, the lowermost note played on the 
keyboard is played.
If a chord is played on the keyboard and only one note is
present in the pattern, only the lowermost pressed note is output at
the first pass through the pattern. For the following repetitions of 
the pattern, the chosen "repeat mode" is used to determine the 
following notes. 
If the pattern contains stacked note streaks (chord mode), chords played 
on the keyboard are also output as chords with polyphony up to the 
number of notes defined in the stack.
.PP
.B Repeat Mode
.PP
This setting defines the behavior of the arpeggio over several repetitions 
of the pattern when the number of notes pressed on the keyboard is higher
than the number of notes present in the pattern.
When 
.B Repeat Mode 
is "Up", the next higher note played on the keyboard is played at each
repetition. With "Down", the next lower note is played. With a single
note present in the arp pattern, this creates classical linear 
arpeggios. This way even simple patterns like "01" (or even "0") will 
generate a complete arpeggio.
When "Static" is selected, this classical arpeggio mode will
be disabled, and the output notes remain constant. 
.PP
.B "Trigger mode"
.PP
QMidiArp's arpeggiators can run in three modes. "No trigger" will cause
the arp running continuously in synchronization with the internal or
external clock source. Even when new notes are played, they will be
output quantized to the running queue. "Kbd restart" will cause a reset
of the playhead position upon the next note to be output, but the 
output pattern stays quantized to the queue. When "Kbd trigger" is
selected, each new note played in stakato will trigger the pattern
with the timing of the played note.
.PP
.B "Editing Arp patterns"
.PP
Arp patterns are defined by a text sequence containing the notes 
themselves as numbers along with control changes for chord, tempo, 
velocity and octave changes. When the 
.B Edit pattern
button in the pattern panel is clicked, the current pattern preset 
appears as a 
text input line. The edited pattern can be stored in the preset list 
by clicking on the 
.B Store pattern
button. The currently active pattern 
can be removed from the
preset list by clicking on the 
.B Remove pattern
button. All preset patterns are immediately saved in the .qmidiarprc
resource file when a pattern is stored or removed, and the new pattern 
list is made available to the other arps in the tab bar. Pattern presets 
are automatically loaded on each application start. 

The syntax for the pattern text is as follows:

0..9 : Note indices
   + : One octave up
   - : One octave down
   = : Reset to standard octave
   > : Double tempo
   < : Half tempo
   . : Reset to standard tempo
(  ) : Chord, begin..end, 
       e.g. (012) would be a chord of the 
       lowermost three notes in the buffer   
   / : Volume up by 20%
   \\ : Volume down by 20%
   d : Double length
   h : Half length
   p : Pause

Any token is valid until the end of a pattern is reached. The token
> will e.g. double the tempo for all following notes of the pattern.
When the loop jumps back to the beginning of the pattern, the tempo
is reset to its initial value, i.e. a quarter note.
.PP
.B Random
.PP
The timing, velocity and length of the output notes can be randomized
using the sliders in the 
.B Random 
panel. These settings can be used to make the arpeggiator sound less
mechanical, but if they are set to higher values, they add
interesting accents to the patterns.
.PP
.B Envelope
.PP
QMidiArp can modulate the velocity of the arpeggios with an envelope
function defined by 
.B Attack 
time and 
.B Release
time. If an attack
time is set, the velocities of the output notes are ramped up during the
attack time defined in seconds. If a release time is set, notes
released from the keyboard are continued to be output while their
velocity is ramped down linearly and until the release time has reached
its end. The envelope function only makes sense if the sound driven
by the arp is velocity-sensitive. It works best with highly polyphonic
patterns such as "Chord Oct 16 A".
.PP
.B Groove
.PP
The 
.B Groove
sliders control a linear shift of timing, length and 
velocity within each beat of the output pattern. This can be used to 
create swing timing and accent. The Groove settings are adjusted for all 
arps simultaneously.

.SS "LFO Modules"
In parallel to the arps, QMidiArp
can send MIDI controller data in form of a low frequency oscillator (LFO)
to the assigned output. The LFO data consist of controller events that 
are in sync with the arpeggiator queue. The queue has to be in running 
state to enable the LFO. Each LFO module has a 
.B waveform 
panel to define the shape of the outgoing data and an 
.B output 
panel to define MIDI Channel, ALSA port and controller number to be
produced. The waveform can currently be set to Sine,
Saw Up, Saw Down, Triangle, Square and Custom. The 
.B frequency 
of the LFO can be set in muliples and divisors of the arp 
.B tempo, 
such that frequency of 1
produces one full wave per beat. If frequencies lower than 1 are
selected, the length of the wavetable has to be adjusted correspondingly
to produce a full wave. The time 
.B resolution 
of the LFO determines the number of events produced every beat and
can be adjusted to up to 192 events per beat. 
.B Amplitude 
and 
.B offset 
of the waveform can be adjusted from 0...127. Low 
.B resolutions 
lead to audibly discrete rythmic controller changes whereas higher 
resolution values lead to more continuous waves.
.PP
.B Muting individual wave points
.PP
Individual wave points can be muted/unmuted by clicking on
the corresponding location in the wave display with the 
.I right mouse button.
A muted wave point is shown in darker color.
.PP
.B Custom Waveforms
.PP
When
.B Custom
is selected, the waveform can be drawn with the
.I left mouse button
in the waveform display. A calculated waveform is copied to the custom 
waveform whenever it is being modified by the mouse. This will overwrite 
the previous custom waveform with the currently displayed waveform. As 
all LFO operations, drawing and muting can be done while the queue is 
running, and becomes effective immediately.
.PP
.B Recording
.PP
The LFO records incoming controller data as selected in the 
.B Input
panel, when the 
.B Record
button is pressed. Note that the Record button itself can be attributed
to a MIDI toggle controller so that it provides a convenient 
implementation of a controller motion sampler and looper.
.PP
.B "LFO Output panel"
.PP
The LFO output panel contains the 
.B port, 
.B channel 
and 
.B controller 
number settings of the LFO data produced by each LFO tab. It also allows 
.B muting 
of each LFO after a completed wave cycle.

.SS "Step Sequencer Modules"
By clicking 
.B "Add Step Sequencer..." 
in the control tool bar, a new 
.B Seq 
module can be added to the tab bar. Each of these modules produce a 
simple linear (monophonic) sequence, similar to the first analog 
hardware sequencers. The Seq modules are controllable while
running, also in a similar way to analog step sequencers.
.PP
.B Programming a sequence
.PP
As QMidiArp's LFO modules, the step sequencer can be programmed
by adjusting notes with left mouse 
clicks on the sequence display. The octave range is fixed to 4. The
lowest note is C2 if the global transpose is set to 0. Notes can be 
muted with the right mouse click. The sequence 
.B length 
can be adjusted between 1 and 8 beats, and the time 
.B resolution 
can be set to values between 1 and 16 per beat. A resolution of 4 means 
that 4 notes are output every beat, i.e. sixteenth notes. 
The sequence can also be programmed using the 
.B Record
function. When the 
.B Record 
button is pressed, notes received on the input port will be recorded
step-by-step starting from the last modified note. Programming can be 
done on the fly also when the sequencer queue is running. 

.PP
.B Controlling the sequence globally
.PP
There are sliders to adjust the global 
.B velocity 
(volume), 
.B note length 
and 
.B transpose 
of the sequence in semitones.
.PP
.B Seq Input and Output panels
.PP
The Seq 
.B Input
panel determines how to handle incoming notes on the MIDI
.B Channel
set in the channel box. If 
.B Note
is checked, the sequence will be globally transposed with the incoming
note as transpose value. If 
.B Velocity
is checked in addition, the sequence will output notes with the same 
velocity as that received on its input. The 
.B Input
panel also determines how the sequence behaves when incoming notes
are received. It can be restarted, triggered and stopped with the 
timing of received notes. 

The Seq
.B Output
panel is equivalent to that of arpeggiator and LFO modules. 
.PP 
Note that accents within a pattern can be produced by running LFO 
modules in parallel to the Seq module, and by sending to the same 
channel and port as the Seq module.

.SS "Settings"
The Settings window allows to configure if and to which port incoming 
events that do not match any module's input filter are forwarded (
.B unmatched
events). It also
allows to set whether incoming controller events are recognized for
muting and controlling
the modules separately. If this option is set, QMidiArp will recognize
MIDI control events that can be attributed to different parameters (see
.B MIDI Control
). By checking the 
.B compact module style
all new created modules will show with small GUI elements to be more 
economic in space when distributed as separate windows over the desktop.
.PP
All settings in this dialog are stored along with the module data in the
qmax session file.

.SS MIDI control
QMidiArp supports MIDI control events if the 
.B Modules controllable by MIDI CC
option is checked in the
.B Settings
dialog. MIDI control is available for Seq modules (Muting, Velocity, 
Note Length), LFO modules (Muting, Amplitude, Offset) and Arp modules
(Muting only).
.PP
.B MIDI Learn
.PP
Controllers can be attributed by right-clicking on the sliders or
mute checkbox in each module and selecting 
.B MIDI Learn.
QMidiArp will then wait for MIDI control events, 
and moving a MIDI controller connected to QMidiArp's input will 
attribute this controller to the control item. It is 
possible to add several MIDI controllers to one item. If 
.B MIDI Forget
is selected, all controllers for that item are removed. If 
.B Cancel MIDI learning
is selected, the learn process is stopped.
.PP
Note that by default, mute controllers are interpreted as toggles, i.e.
the mute state is toggled on reception of a value of 127 from the 
attributed controller.
.PP
.B Control Editor
.PP
The
.B Control Editor
is accessible from the 
.I View 
menu. Controls can be edited by MIDI control number, channel, and the
minimum and maximum values that are sent to the control item. Mute 
controllers have a special behaviour. If minimum and maximum are 
.I equal,
the controller acts as toggler upon reception of the adjusted value.
If minimum is 
.I different
from maximum, the corresponding module will be muted upon reception of 
minimum and unmuted upon reception of maximum as values.
.PP
If
.B Remove
is pressed, the currently selected line will be removed, pressing
.B Revert
reloads the current controller settings. Pressing 
.B Cancel 
quits the control editor without applying changes, and only if 
.B OK
is pressed, the edited control list becomes active.

.SS "Event Log"
The
.B Event Log 
displays incoming MIDI events. It is displayed in the bottom area by 
default, but can be hidden if not
needed or set floating as a top-level window on the desktop. Logging 
can also be disabled generally or for MIDI Clock events only. 

.SS Example Files
There are currently three demo arpeggios. 
The demo.qma arpeggio was intended to be used with the following sound 
types: Ch 1: Marimba, Ch 2: Celesta, Ch 3: Acoustic Bass, 
but you can get interesting results if you use other instrument settings.
.PP
The demo_seqlfo.qmax setup shows the use of the new sequencer and LFO
modules playing in parallel. The sequencer outputs should be routed
to percussive synthesizer sounds. The LFO data is intended to act on 
filter cutoff, which has the standard controller CC#74. ZynAddSubFX by
Paul Nasca reacts on these filter cutoff controllers. The "Bass 1"
and "Plucked 3" presets from this synthesizer work well with this demo 
file.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-portCount\  <num>
Set the number of available ALSA output ports to <num>. The default
is 2.
.TP
.BI \-\-help
Print possible command-line options and exit.
.TP
.BI \-\-version
Print version information and exit.
.TP
.B file
Name of a valid QMidiArp (.qmax) XML file to be loaded on start.
.SH FILES
.I *.qmax
.RS
QMidiArp XML files containing session data in XML text format.
.RE
.I *.qma
.RS
Old QMidiArp files in plain text format.
.SH EXAMPLES
Example QMidiArp files can be found in 
.I /usr/share/qmidiarp
or in
.I /usr/local/share/qmidiarp
.SH NOTES
Errors and warnings are written to 
.BR stderr (3).
.SH SUPPORT
qmidiarp-devel@lists.sourceforge.net
.SH AUTHORS
Frank Kober, Guido Scholz and Matthias Nagorni. This
manual page was written by
Frank Kober <emuse@users.sourceforge.net>.
